DOCS-13161-mule-upgrade-tool-v4.4-cv (W-10590504) (#2159)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/mule-upgrade-tool.adoc

*Latest version: 1.0.0*

include::release-notes::partial$mule-upgrade-tool/mule-upgrade-tool.adoc[tag=intro]

The Mule upgrade tool runs in any environment that is capable of running a standalone Mule instance. This tool can update only standalone Mule instances that are running any Mule 4 version. You can upgrade local Mule instances to
//the latest available version or to
a particular Mule distribution that you have previously downloaded and unpacked. You can also use the Mule upgrade tool to update Mule instances located in different folders.

As part of the upgrade process, the Mule upgrade tool also updates the Runtime Manager agent version if it is installed in your current Mule instance.

== Before You Begin

Before starting your upgrade, ensure that you have:

* A currently operational Mule 4 instance, in _stopped_ status to prepare for the upgrade
* The Mule upgrade tool inside your current Mule instance's `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory
+
If the Mule upgrade tool is not bundled with your current Mule distribution, download the tool from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Support Portal^] and copy it into the `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory of your current Mule instance.

> * The new Mule runtime engine distribution you want to upgrade to

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we should refer to "the distribution you want to upgrade to" or just refer to "the latest distribution", as the scope and aim of the upgrade tool is that you upgrade to the latest one. @estebanwasinger what do you think?

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: Addressed in [d6fd62a](https://github.com/mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime/pull/2159/commits/d6fd62ae387578659d4972550cd9f16a41264be1)

+
You can download Mule distributions from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Support Portal^].
* At least 2 GB of available disk space on the file system and access privileges to install the new Mule distribution.
//Confirm if the tool is downloaded from the Support portal or help center, and update the link.

//This feature is not yet available
////
== Upgrade Mule to the Latest Version

To upgrade your Mule instance to the latest version:

. Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.
. Run the `upgrade` command:
+
```
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool upgrade
```
////

== Upgrade Mule to a Specific Distribution

> To upgrade your Mule instance to a specific Mule distribution:

Reviewer: Same here, we might document this as the need to specify the path to where the new distribution is located, but not aimed to upgrade to a "specific" distribution. Although it is possible, we should encourage latest only.
cc @estebanwasinger

Reviewer 2: Yes, despite that we are not doing any kind of version control, I would rephrase it to make it clear that you should always update to the "latest version"

Author: Addressed in [d6fd62a](https://github.com/mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime/pull/2159/commits/d6fd62ae387578659d4972550cd9f16a41264be1)

  +
  `$ ./upgrade-tool upgrade -n /<newMuleDistributionPath>`
  ! `-o <localMuleInstancePath>`
  ! Upgrades the local Mule instance located in path `<localMuleInstancePath>`. This option enables you to upgrade a different Mule instance than the one located in the same `$MULE_HOME` path as the upgrade tool, for example:
  +
  `$ ./upgrade-tool upgrade -o /<localMuleInstancePath>`
  ! `-d` ! Simulates the upgrade process without performing any permanent changes to the current Mule instance.
  ! `-f` ! Performs the upgrade without requesting user confirmation for destructive operations like overwriting a backup or removing applied patches.
!===
| `rollback`
| Restores the Mule instance to its previous state. This command works only after performing a successful upgrade with the tool. +
The following are the supported options for this command:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols=".^a,.^a"]
!===
  ! Options ! Description
  ! `-o <localMuleInstancePath>`
  ! Restores the local Mule instance located in path `<localMuleInstancePath>`. This option enables you to restore a different Mule instance than the one located in the same `$MULE_HOME` path as the upgrade tool, for example:
  +

>   `$ ./upgrade-tool upgrade -o /<localMuleInstancePath>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `$ ./upgrade-tool rollback -o /<localMuleInstancePath>`
```

```
////

== Upgrade Mule

To upgrade your Mule instance to the latest version:

. Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.
. Run the `upgrade -n` command, specifying the directory of the latest Mule distribution as an argument:
+
```
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool upgrade -n ./<newMuleDistributionPath>

```

== Roll Back an Upgrade

The Mule upgrade tool generates a backup of your existing Mule instance before starting the upgrade process. The backup is stored in the `$MULE_HOME/backup` folder in case you want to use the tool to restore your upgraded Mule instance to its previous state.

To perform a rollback:

. Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.
. Run the `rollback` command:
```
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool rollback
```

== Mule Upgrade Tool Commands and Options

The following table lists and describes the commands and options you can use when running the Mule upgrade tool:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols=".^a,.^a"]
|===
|Command | Description
| `upgrade`
| Upgrades the local Mule instance to the latest available version. +
The following are the supported options for this command:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols=".^a,.^a"]
!===
  ! Options ! Description

>   ! `-n <newMuleDistributionPath>`

Reviewer 3: We could show the long option of the parameters and the help parameter as it is shown in the upgrade tool readme https://github.com/mulesoft/mule-runtime-upgrade-tool/blob/master/README.md#usage

!===
| `rollback`
| Restores the Mule instance to its previous state. This command works only after performing a successful upgrade with the tool. +
The following are the supported options for this command:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols=".^a,.^a"]
!===
  ! Options ! Description
  ! `-o <localMuleInstancePath>`
  ! Restores the local Mule instance located in path `<localMuleInstancePath>`. This option enables you to restore a different Mule instance than the one located in the same `$MULE_HOME` path as the upgrade tool, for example:
  +
  `$ ./upgrade-tool rollback -o /<localMuleInstancePath>`
  ! `-d` ! Simulates the rollback process without performing any permanent changes to the current Mule instance.
  ! `-f` ! Restores the Mule instance without requesting user confirmation.
!===
| `status`
| Provides information about the current Mule instance, including:

* The Mule runtime engine version
* A message confirming that the current Mule instance meets conditions to upgrade or roll back
* Any existing backup and its location
* The integrity of the backup, if it exists

> 

Reviewer 3: Should we add a troubleshooting section like in the readme? https://github.com/mulesoft/mule-runtime-upgrade-tool/blob/master/README.md#troubleshooting

> = Mule Upgrade Tool

Reviewer 4: Because there are task subtopics, we might need to retitle this as advised in our template, using a gerund title:
Upgrading Your Mule Instance? [Using the Mule Upgrade Tool]?

*Latest version: 1.0.0*

include::release-notes::partial$mule-upgrade-tool/mule-upgrade-tool.adoc[tag=intro]

> == Compatibility

Reviewer 4: How would you feel about using a more template-oriented approach to this topic, something like this:

= Upgrading Your Mule Instances by Using the Mule Upgrade Tool

Use the Mule upgrade tool to upgrade standalone instances of Mule 4. The tool enables you to upgrade local Mule instances to
//the latest available version or to
a particular Mule distribution that you have previously downloaded and unpacked), and to upgrade to Mule instances located in different folders. 

The Mule upgrade tool runs in any environment that is capable of running a standalone instance of Mule 4.

When the tool upgrades your current Mule instance, it also downloads the Runtime Manager agent that is bundled with the upgrade. If the Runtime Manager agent is already installed in your current Mule instance, the tool also updates the agent. 
[Question: if RTA is bundled with the upgrade, doesn't it stand to reason that the existing RTA is updated as well? Do we actually need to say this?]

The Mule upgrade tool also includes backup and rollback functionality.

 == Before You Begin....

 [[TBD?]] == Upgrade Your Mule 4 Instance Locally....steps....

 == Upgrade Your Mule 4 Instance to a Specific Distribution....steps....

 == Roll Back the Upgrade....steps

== Tool Commands and Options....reference

Reviewer 4: I suggest this only because I found breaking up the introduction to the tool into smaller topics addressing compatibility, location of upgrade, and "considerations" a bit distracting. I think that task topic sets optimally comprise...
* An intro (concepts): why you perform the task and what it involves
* Prerequisites (if any)
* Steps

Reviewer 4: I've also copyedited the existing material as-is in case you disagree with my suggestion. ;-)

> 

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure that these requirements need to be called out separately when they could be part of an introductory text, but if you do keep this list, it would be nice to have a text intro to it, following the subtitle and before the first list item.

* The Mule upgrade tool runs in any environment that is capable of running a standalone Mule instance.
* You can update only standalone Mule instances with this tool.
* The upgrade tool is compatible with Mule 4 versions only.

== Before You Begin

> Before getting started, ensure you have:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before starting your upgrade, ensure that you have:
```

> 

Reviewer 4: Remove periods from the ends of these list items.

> * A Mule 4 instance currently configured and working in your local environment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* A currently operational Mule 4 instance, in the stopped state to prepare for the upgrade
```
See Line 22 comment below.

Reviewer 4: I would move the last bullet to follow this one, since they both address your current installation:

* The Mule upgrade tool inside your current Mule instance's `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory.

If the Mule upgrade tool is not bundled with your current Mule distribution, download the tool from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Support Portal^] and copy it into the `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory of your current Mule instance.

> * The Mule runtime engine version you want to upgrade to.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The Mule runtime engine version you want to upgrade to
```

+

> You can download Mule from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Support Portal^].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can download this version from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Support Portal^].
```

Reviewer 4: (I don't know about your audience, but I always get confused that Mule 3 or Mule 4, which sound like versions of Mule to me, also have versions....)

> * At least 2 GiB of available disk space on the file system and access privileges to install the new Mule distribution.

Reviewer 4: Use GB for gigabytes
Gb for gigabits

Reviewer 4: (I like the phrase "the new Mule distribution"; it is less confusing to me than "the new Mule version")

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* At least 2 GB of available disk space on the file system and access privileges to install the new Mule distribution
```

> * The Mule instance to update in stopped status.

Reviewer 4: I would combine this with the first list item, because it is not quite parallel to the peer list items.

> //Confirm if the tool is downloaded from the Support portal or help center, and update the link.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
//Confirm that the tool is downloaded from the Support portal or help center, and update the link.
```

> * The Mule upgrade tool inside your current Mule instance's `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory.
> +
> If the Mule upgrade tool is not bundled with your current Mule distribution, download the tool from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Support Portal^] and copy it into the `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory of your current Mule instance.

Reviewer 4: I would move this to follow the first list item.
```suggestion
```

> == Upgrade a Mule Instance

Reviewer 4: This title erroneously made me think that we had arrived at the steps to upgrade, but it's just more background/context/conceptual info that I would move to the topic set introduction, as shown earlier.
```suggestion
```

> You can upgrade local Mule instances to
> //the latest available version or to
> a particular Mule distribution that you have previously downloaded and unpacked. You can also use the Mule upgrade tool to update Mule instances located in different folders.

Reviewer 4: ditto
```suggestion
```

> === Considerations

Reviewer 4: A vague title; suggest incorporating into intro.
```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 4: Suggested final end to topic set intro, but evaluated for necessity:

> When the tool upgrades your Mule instance, it also downloads the Runtime Manager agent that is bundled with the new Mule version. If the Runtime Manager agent was installed in your previous Mule instance, the tool also updates the agent to the new version that comes bundled with the new Mule version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the tool upgrades your current Mule instance, it also downloads the Runtime Manager agent that is bundled with the new Mule distribution. If the Runtime Manager agent is already installed in your current Mule instance, the tool updates the agent as part of the distribution.
```
Do we really need to point this out? Seems to me that if you upgrade the existing instance, every part of that instance is upgraded to every part of the new distribution. 
If we have to mention this at all, it might just be simpler to say that upgrading your instance includes updating or adding the Runtime Manager agent bundled as part of that instance.

//This feature is not yet available
////

> === Upgrade Mule to the Latest Version

Reviewer 4: This would become == if you omit the previous Upgrade title.
And is it accurate to use the parallel titles of upgrading locally vs. upgrading to a specific distribution?

To upgrade your Mule instance to the latest version:

. Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.
. Run the `upgrade` command:
+
```
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool upgrade
```
////

=== Upgrade Mule to a Specific Distribution

To upgrade your Mule instance to a specific Mule distribution:

. Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.
. Run the `upgrade -n` command, specifying the directory of the new Mule distribution as an argument:
+
```
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool upgrade -n ./<mule-home-of-the-later-version>

```

== Backup and Rollback

The Mule upgrade tool generates a backup of the current Mule instance before starting the upgrade process. The backup is stored in the `$MULE_HOME/.backup` folder. This backup allows the upgrade tool to restore a Mule instance to its previous state before performing the upgrade.

=== Rollback an Upgrade

To perform a rollback to the previous state before an upgrade:

. Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.
. Run the `rollback` command:
```

> $MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool rollback

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
== Roll Back an Upgrade

The Mule upgrade tool generates a backup of your existing Mule instance before starting the upgrade process. The backup is stored in the `$MULE_HOME/.backup` folder in case you want to use the tool to restore your upgraded Mule instance to its previous state.

To perform a rollback:

. Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.
. Run the `rollback` command:
```
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool rollback
```

```

== Mule Upgrade Tool Commands and Options

> The following reference table shows a list of possible commands and options you can use when running the Mule upgrade tool:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following table lists and describes commands and options you can use when running the Mule upgrade tool:
```

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols=".^a,.^a"]
|===
|Command | Description
| `upgrade`
| Upgrades the local Mule instance to the latest available version. +
The following are the supported options for this command:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols=".^a,.^a"]
!===
  ! Options ! Description
  ! `-n <newMuleDistributionPath>`

>   ! Upgrades the local Mule instance to a specific distribution that is downloaded and unpacked in your file system. Parameter `<newMuleDistribution>` specifies the path to the new Mule distribution.
>   +
>   For example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  ! Upgrades the local Mule instance to a specific distribution that is downloaded and unpacked in your file system. Parameter `<newMuleDistribution>` specifies the path to the new Mule distribution, for example:
```

  +
  `$ ./upgrade-tool upgrade -n /mule-home-of-the-later-version`
  ! `-o <localMuleInstancePath>`
  ! Upgrades the local Mule instance located in path `<localMuleInstancePath>`. This option enables you to upgrade a different Mule instance than the one located in the same `$MULE_HOME` path as the upgrade tool.
  +

>   For example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  ! Upgrades the local Mule instance located in path `<localMuleInstancePath>`. This option enables you to upgrade a different Mule instance than the one located in the same `$MULE_HOME` path as the upgrade tool, for example:
```

  +
  `$ ./upgrade-tool upgrade -o /mule-home-of-the-instace-to-upgrade`
  ! `-d` ! Simulates the upgrade process without performing any permanent changes to the current Mule instance.
  ! `-f` ! Performs the upgrade without requesting user confirmation for destructive operations like overwriting a backup or removing applied patches.
!===
| `rollback`
| Restores the Mule instance to its previous state. This command works only after performing a successful upgrade with the tool. +
The following are the supported options for this command:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols=".^a,.^a"]
!===
  ! Options ! Description
  ! `-o <localMuleInstancePath>`

>   ! Restores the local Mule instance located in path `<localMuleInstancePath>`. This option enables you to restore a different Mule instance than the one located in the same `$MULE_HOME` path as the upgrade tool.
>   +
>   For example:

Reviewer 4: ditto: GLOBALLY avoid putting "For example:" on a line by itself, as the sole introduction to an example or other nonnarrative element.
```suggestion
  ! Restores the local Mule instance located in path `<localMuleInstancePath>`. This option enables you to restore a different Mule instance than the one located in the same `$MULE_HOME` path as the upgrade tool, for example:
```

  +
  `$ ./upgrade-tool upgrade -o /mule-home-of-the-instace-to-restore`
  ! `-d` ! Simulates the rollback process without performing any permanent changes to the current Mule instance.
  ! `-f` ! Restores the Mule instance without requesting user confirmation.
!===
| `status`
| Provides information about the current Mule instance, including:

* The Mule runtime engine version

> * A message confirming if the current Mule instance mets conditions to upgrade or rollback

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* A message confirming that the current Mule instance meets conditions to upgrade or roll back
```
rollback = adjective or noun
(to) roll back = verb

* Any existing backup and its location

> * Integrity of the backup, if it exists

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The integrity of the backup, if it exists
```

= Mule Upgrade Tool

*Latest version: 1.0.0*

include::release-notes::partial$mule-upgrade-tool/mule-upgrade-tool.adoc[tag=intro]

You can use the Mule upgrade tool to update or upgrade Mule instances located in different folders.

> If the Runtime Manager agent is installed in your current Mule instance, the upgrade tool also updates the agent version as part of the upgrade process.

Reviewer 5: Wondering if we use "the" before "Runtime manager agent" and "Mule upgrade tool"?  Maybe yes if they are not official product names?

The Mule upgrade tool does not support upgrading clustered Mule instances. For clustered environments, upgrade each of the nodes manually by following the instructions in xref:release-notes::mule-runtime/updating-mule-4-versions.adoc#mulerunvers[Upgrading an On-Premises Mule Instance Managed Through Runtime Manager]

== Before You Begin

Before starting your upgrade, ensure that you have:

* A currently operational Mule 4.x instance, in _stopped_ status to prepare for the upgrade
* The Mule upgrade tool inside your current Mule instance's `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory
+
Download the tool from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Help Center^] and copy it into the `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory of your current Mule instance.
* The latest Mule runtime engine distribution, downloaded and unpacked in your system
+

> The Mule upgrade tool requires the full distribution of the latest Mule runtime minor or patch version. Ensure you download a full Mule runtime distribution, identified by including the term `distribution` (and not the term `patch`) in the file name, for example: `mule-ee-distribution-standalone-4.4.0-20220221.zip`.

Reviewer 5: Since it's sort of confusing that the full version of the patch update doesn't contain the term patch, I'm wondering if we need to indicate somehow that mule-ee-distribution-standalone-4.4.0-20220221.zip  is a full distribution of the patch update.

Reviewer 5: maybe "... for example, for the full distribution of the 20220221 patch for Mule 4.4.0:"

+
You can download Mule runtime distributions from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Help Center^].

> * At least 2 GB of available disk space on the file system and access privileges to install the new Mule distribution

Reviewer 5: Here we say 2 GB. Below we say 2GiB.

* (For Windows environments) The execution policy for Powershell scripts set to *Unrestricted*

//This feature is not yet available
////
== Upgrade Mule to the Latest Version

To upgrade your Mule instance to the latest version:

. Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.
. Run the `upgrade` command:
+
```
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool upgrade
```
////

== Upgrade or Update Mule

To upgrade or update your Mule instance to the latest version:

. Navigate to the `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory, where you downloaded the Mule upgrade tool.
. Run the `upgrade -n` subcommand, specifying as an argument the directory where the latest Mule runtime distribution is downloaded and unpacked, for example:
+
[source,bash,linenums]
----
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool upgrade -n ./<newMuleDistributionPath>
----

== Roll Back an Upgrade or Update

> Before starting the upgrade or update, Mule upgrade tool creates a backup of your existing Mule Runtime instance. This is to let you restore your Mule Runtime instance to its previous state. This backup gets stored in the $MULE_HOME/backup folder. "Mule Runtime instance"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 5: Looks like the edited version of the above paragraph is below.

. Run the `rollback` subcommand, for example:
+
[source,bash,linenums]
----
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool rollback
----

== Solving File Conflicts

The Mule upgrade tool compares configuration files from the _current_ Mule distribution and the _new_ distribution to detect changes and prevent losing them. When the Mule upgrade tool detects changes in the _new_ Mule distribution configuration files, the tool performs the following actions:

* Fails the execution of the `upgrade` subcommand, showing an error message
* Logs the names of the Mule configuration files with conflicts into the log output
* Copies the configuration files inside the `${MULE_HOME}/conf` directory of the current Mule distribution to `${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-config-files/conf` and adds the suffix `_TO_REVIEW` to the configuration files with conflicts
* Copies the original content of the configuration files from the _current_ and _new_ Mule distributions to the following folders so you can compare them and identify the changes:
+
`${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/ORIGINAL_CONFIG_FILES_OLD_DISTRO/`
+
`${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/ORIGINAL_CONFIG_FILES_NEW_DISTRO/`

> If the Mule upgrade tool fails the upgrade process due to conflicts with the configuration files, follow the next steps to resolve the conflicts and continue the upgrade process.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If the upgrade process fails due to conflicts with the configuration files, follow the next steps to resolve the conflicts and continue the upgrade process.
```

[[steps-to-solve-conflicts]]
=== Steps to Solve Conflicts with Mule Configuration Files

Follow these steps to resolve conflicts during an upgrade:

> . Inside the `${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/conf/` folder of the current Mule distribution, locate one of the files that has a conflict.

Reviewer 5: "current" is probably understood but might be even more clear to say something like "of the current Mule distribution that you are upgrading" or some such

=== Unattended Upgrades or Updates

You can perform an unattended upgrade or update by resolving the conflicts in a different environment before running the upgrade in the target environment. This procedure works only if the _current_ and _new_ Mule distributions that you configure in the secondary environment match the versions of the _current_ and _new_ Mule distributions, respectively, that you have in the main environment:

. In an environment where user interaction is possible, review and resolve all the conflicts as explained in <<steps-to-solve-conflicts>>.
. In the target environment, copy the files from `${MULE_HOME_WITH_USER_INTERACTION}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/conf/` to `${MULE_HOME_WITHOUT_USER_INTERACTION}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/conf/`.
. Run the `upgrade` subcommand in the target environment.

== Configure Logging for the Mule Upgrade Tool

You can enable debug logging to add detailed information about each operation, change the folder where the tool stores the logs, and also use a customized log configuration file for the Mule upgrade tool.

> === Specify a Custom Log4j File

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
=== Specify a Custom Log4j 2 File
```

Reviewer 5: not sure if the "2" matters here and when talking about the related files, but just in case: https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/

To use a custom Log4j file, use the `-l` parameter and specify the file name of the custom Log4j configuration file to use, for example:

[source,bash,linenums]
----
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool -l myLog4j2File.xml upgrade
----

=== Enable DEBUG Level Logs

To enable debug logging:

. Open the Log4j file you are using with the tool.
. Replace the `level` property value `INFO` with `DEBUG`, in the following line of the Log4j file:
+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<Logger level="INFO" name="com.mulesoft.runtime.upgrade.tool.service" additivity="false">
----

=== Customize the Logs Output

By default, the Mule upgrade tool stores logs in the `./mule-runtime-upgrade-tool-logs directory`.

To change the file name, output path, and log pattern:

. Open the Log4j file you are using with the tool.
. Specify the desired values for the `fileName` and `filePattern` properties:
+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<RollingFile name="RollingFile"
  fileName="./mule-runtime-upgrade-tool-logs/mule-runtime-upgrade-tool-logs.log"
  filePattern="./mule-runtime-upgrade-tool-logs/$${date:yyyy-MM}/mule-runtime-upgrade-tool-logs-%d{-dd-MMMM-yyyy}-%i.log.gz" >
----

== Mule Upgrade Tool Subcommands and Options

> The following table lists and describes the subcommands and options you can use when running the Mule upgrade tool:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The following table describes the subcommands and options you can use when running the Mule upgrade tool:
```

Reviewer 5: I should've noticed that the first time I looked at that sentence... oh well.

                    upgrade
  -o, --old-mule-distro=<oldMuleDistro>
                  File path of Mule Runtime distribution to upgrade
----

The `Usage:` line specifies which options and arguments are optional by enclosing them in square brackets (`[`,`]`). Options and arguments without square brackets are mandatory.

=== No space left on device

----
$ cd /opt/mule-enterprise-standalone-4.4.0-20211026/tools
$ ./upgrade-tool upgrade -n /tmp/mule-enterprise-standalone-4.4.0-20211104

Mule Runtime Upgrade Tool
─────────────────────────

INFO: Initiating upgrade process...
INFO: Upgrading distribution at path [/opt/mule-enterprise-standalone-4.4.0-20211026] with version: [4.4.0-20211104] to distribution at path [/tmp/mule-enterprise-standalone-4.4.0-20211104] with version [4.4.0-20211104] ...
ERROR: Version of new Mule distribution 4.4.0-20211104 should be newer than old Mule distribution: 4.4.0-20211104
ERROR: There's not enough disk space for performing the upgrade.
ERROR: No space left on device
No space left on device
----

==== Cause

This error indicates that there is no available disk space to run the upgrade.

==== Solution

> The tool requires at least 2GiB of space available in the file system in which the Mule instance is running. Ensure that your system has

Reviewer 5: Compare 2GiB  here with a 2 GB above.

= Mule Upgrade Tool

*Latest version: 1.0.0*

include::release-notes::partial$mule-upgrade-tool/mule-upgrade-tool.adoc[tag=intro]

> The Mule upgrade tool runs in any environment that is capable of running a standalone Mule instance. This tool can update only standalone Mule instances that are running any Mule 4 version.

Reviewer 6: Mule Runtime Upgrade tool provides a fully automated solution for patching and upgrading standalone on-premise installations of Mule Runtime, version 4.0 or above. The tool is available as a separate download and can be used with existing or new Mule Runtime standalone deployments. The tool is available as command line utility so it can be easily integrated with existing automated processes or workflows via scripts and cron jobs.

//You can upgrade local Mule instances to the latest available version or to a particular Mule distribution that you have previously downloaded and unpacked.

> You can also use the Mule upgrade tool to update Mule instances located in different folders.

Reviewer 6: Remove the term "also". Proposed text here:

You can use the Mule upgrade tool to update Mule instances located in different folders.

> As part of the upgrade process, the Mule upgrade tool also updates the Runtime Manager agent version if it is installed in your current Mule instance.

Reviewer 6: Note: 
1. Mule Runtime Upgrade tool is only available for Mule Runtime version 4 and above. 
2. If Runtime Manager agent is installed in your current Mule instance, Mule upgrade tool will upgrade the Runtime Manager agent version also. 
3. For clustered instances of Mule Runtime, you need to upgrade each cluster nodes independently by following the instructions in xref:release-notes::mule-runtime/updating-mule-4-versions.adoc#mulerunvers[Upgrading an On-Premises Mule Instance Managed Through Runtime Manager]

> The Mule upgrade tool does not support upgrading clustered Mule instances. For clustered environments, upgrade each of the nodes manually by following the instructions in xref:release-notes::mule-runtime/updating-mule-4-versions.adoc#mulerunvers[Upgrading an On-Premises Mule Instance Managed Through Runtime Manager]

Reviewer 6: Remove this line. Covered in the note above.

== Before You Begin

Before starting your upgrade, ensure that you have:

> * A currently operational Mule 4 instance, in _stopped_ status to prepare for the upgrade

Reviewer 6: Mule Runtime version 4 or above

* The Mule upgrade tool inside your current Mule instance's `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory
+

> If the Mule upgrade tool is not bundled with your current Mule distribution, download the tool from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Help Center^] and copy it into the `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory of your current Mule instance.

Reviewer 6: Remove the line that it is not bundled with your Mule distribution. Suggested text: 

Download the Mule Runtime Upgrade tool from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Help Center^] and copy it into the `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory of your current Mule instance.

* The latest Mule runtime engine distribution, downloaded and unpacked in your system
+

> The Mule upgrade tool does not support upgrading to patch distributions, identified by including the word `patch` in the file name. Ensure you download a full Mule distribution, identified by including the word `distribution` in the file name, for example: `mule-ee-distribution-standalone-4.4.0-20220221.zip`.

Reviewer 6: The Mule Runtime upgrade tool requires full distribution of the newer patch or upgrade version of the Mule Runtime. Ensure you download a full Mule Runtime distribution identified by including the term `distribution` (and not the term 'patch') in the file name, for example: `mule-ee-distribution-standalone-4.4.0-20220221.zip`. 

@Cristian-Venticinque

+

> You can download Mule distributions from the https://help.mulesoft.com/s/[Help Center^].

Reviewer 6: "Mule Runtime"

* At least 2 GB of available disk space on the file system and access privileges to install the new Mule distribution
* (For Windows environments) The execution policy for Powershell scripts set to *Unrestricted*

//This feature is not yet available
////
== Upgrade Mule to the Latest Version

> To upgrade your Mule instance to the latest version:

Reviewer 6: "Mule Runtime instance"

> . Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.

Reviewer 6: @Cristian-Venticinque -> please clarify which directory is this. Is this the directory where Upgrade tool files are extracted?

. Run the `upgrade` command:
+
```
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool upgrade
```
////

> == Upgrade Mule

Reviewer 6: Patch or upgrade Mule Runtime to a new version

To upgrade your Mule instance to the latest version:

. Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.

> . Run the `upgrade -n` subcommand, specifying as an argument the directory where the latest Mule distribution is downloaded and unpacked:

Reviewer 6: "Mule Runtime"

+
[source,bash,linenums]
----
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool upgrade -n ./<newMuleDistributionPath>
----

== Roll Back an Upgrade

> The Mule upgrade tool generates a backup of your existing Mule instance before starting the upgrade process. The backup is stored in the `$MULE_HOME/backup` folder in case you want to use the tool to restore your upgraded Mule instance to its previous state.

Reviewer 6: Suggested text:

Before starting the upgrade, Mule upgrade tool creates a backup of your existing Mule Runtime instance. This is to let you restore your Mule Runtime instance to its previous state. This  backup gets stored in the `$MULE_HOME/backup` folder. "Mule Runtime instance"

To perform a rollback:

> . Navigate to the Mule upgrade tool directory.

Reviewer 6: "Mule Runtime" 
Also, please clarify which directory.

. Run the `rollback` subcommand:
+
[source,bash,linenums]
----
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool rollback
----

> == Troubleshooting File Conflicts

Reviewer 6: @Cristian-Venticinque troubleshooting section should come towards the end. "Configure Logging for the Mule Upgrade Tool" and "Mule Upgrade Tool Subcommands and Options" should come before this. @aiannucci - do you agree?

Author: Originally, this was a subsection of the "Upgrade" command, since it is during this step where these errors arise, but I decided to leave it as an H2 header so it shows in the right navigation panel. 
Maybe it makes more sense to include it again as a sub-section of the upgrade command and rename it to "Solving File Conflicts"?

> Before performing the upgrade, the tool compares configuration files from the _current_ Mule distribution and the _new_ distribution to detect changes and prevent these changes from being lost.

Reviewer 6: "the tool compares configuration files of the _current_ Mule Runtime distribution with the _new_ distribution to detect changes and prevent these changes from being lost.

** `${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/ORIGINAL_CONFIG_FILES_NEW_DISTRO/fileWithConflicts.conf`
. After reviewing the differences, you can either accept or discard the changes:
* If you decide to accept the changes, merge the content of the file `${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/conf/fileWithConflicts_TO_REVIEW.conf` with the changes in the `${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/ORIGINAL_CONFIG_FILES_NEW_DISTRO/fileWithConflicts.conf` file.
* If you decide to discard the changes, skip this step.
+
Note that discarding the changes might lead to using deprecated settings in the updated Mule distribution.
. Rename the `${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/conf/fileWithConflicts_TO_REVIEW.conf` file by removing the `_TO_REVIEW` suffix.
. Repeat steps 1 to 4 for each configuration file that has the `_TO_REVIEW` suffix.
. Retry running the `upgrade` subcommand.
+
When the upgrade finishes successfully, the tool deletes the `${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-config-files` folder to have a clean environment for future upgrades.

=== Unattended Upgrades

> You can perform an unattended upgrade by resolving the conflicts in a different environment before running the upgrade in the target environment. This procedure works only if the _current_ and _new_ Mule distributions are in the same version in both environments:

Reviewer 6: @Cristian-Venticinque @aiannucci I don't really understand this "This procedure works only if the _current_ and _new_ Mule distributions are in the same version in both environments:" 

Can you make it clearer?

Author: Would this help clarify: 
"This procedure works only if the _current_ and _new_ Mule distributions that you configure in the secondary environment match the versions of the _current_ and _new_ Mule distributions, respectively, that you have in the main environment:"

. In an environment where user interaction is possible, review and resolve all the conflicts as explained in <<steps-to-solve-conflicts>>.
. In the target environment, copy the files from `${MULE_HOME_WITH_USER_INTERACTION}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/conf/` to `${MULE_HOME_WITHOUT_USER_INTERACTION}/upgrade-tool/mule-configs-files/conf/`.
. Run the `upgrade` subcommand in the target environment.

> == Configure Logging for the Mule Upgrade Tool

Reviewer 6: IMO, this section should come before the troubleshooting section i.e. "Troubleshooting File Conflicts".

+
[source,bash,linenums]
----
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool upgrade -n ./<newMuleDistributionPath>
----

== Roll Back an Upgrade or Update

Before starting an upgrade or update process, the Mule upgrade tool generates a backup of your existing Mule instance, which enables you to restore the upgraded or updated Mule instance to its previous state. The backup is stored in the `$MULE_HOME/backup` folder.

To perform a rollback:

. Navigate to the `$MULE_HOME/tools` directory, where you downloaded the Mule upgrade tool.
. Run the `rollback` subcommand, for example:
+
[source,bash,linenums]
----
$MULE_HOME/tools/upgrade-tool rollback
----

== Solving File Conflicts

The Mule upgrade tool compares configuration files from the _current_ Mule distribution and the _new_ distribution to detect changes and prevent losing them. When the Mule upgrade tool detects changes in the _new_ Mule distribution configuration files, the tool performs the following actions:

* Fails the execution of the `upgrade` subcommand, showing an error message
* Logs the names of the Mule configuration files with conflicts into the log output

> * Copies the configuration files with conflicts from the `${MULE_HOME}/conf` directory of the current Mule distribution to `${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-config-conflicts/to-review`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Copies the configuration files with conflicts from the `${MULE_HOME}/conf` directory of the current Mule distribution to `${MULE_HOME}/upgrade-tool/mule-config-conflicts/to_review`.
```

----

==== Cause

Write permissions in the old Mule distribution are required but not set for the user who is performing the upgrade, so that user cannot write to the file referenced in the stack trace.

==== Solution

Obtain write permission to files that the upgrade tool identifies. Contact your system administrator for assistance, if necessary.

=== Mule Runtime should be stopped

----
./upgrade-tool upgrade -n /tmp/mule-enterprise-standalone-4.4.0-20211104

Mule Runtime Upgrade Tool
─────────────────────────

INFO: Initiating upgrade process...
INFO: Upgrading distribution at path [/opt/mule-enterprise-standalone-4.4.0-20211026] with version: [4.4.0-20211026] to distribution at path [/tmp/mule-enterprise-standalone-4.4.0-20211104] with version [4.4.0-20211104] ...
ERROR: Mule Runtime should be stopped.
ERROR: Not all preconditions are met to perform the upgrade. Review the log for details.
Not all preconditions are met to perform the upgrade. Review the log for details.
----

==== Cause

The upgrade tool detected that Mule is running.

==== Solution

Stop Mule before starting the upgrade process. To check the current status, use the command `${MULE_HOME}/bin/mule status`.

> 

Reviewer 3: We could add this troubleshooting section: https://github.com/mulesoft/mule-runtime-upgrade-tool#your-mule-version-is-not-supported-for-an-upgrade
